---
published: false
title: On Left and Right
layout: post
tags: personal
---

You can't limit how low people can fall without also limiting how high they can rise. In social matters, there can be no safety net without a ceiling. 

As such, people will behave accordingly to the expectations placed upon them. 

These expectations are generated and sustained by society (unwritten traditions), by governments (written law) and by education, which is the intermingling of both. 

These expectations concern behavior and ability at the individual level. However, they come hand-in-hand with expectations at the collective level, call them meta-expectations about how behavior and ability can acceptably fluctuate across age, across regions and across generations. 

Politics and economics are the areas where these meta-expectations are discussed and edited -- or at least, firmly believed to be editable in a top-down manner, despite overwhelming historical evidence to the contrary.

So then, one could apprehend a political theory as a certain version of the behavior-ability distribution, with left-wing theories generally more in favor of flatter distributions, and right-wing theories more in favor of non-flat distributions. 

The left defends the noble and crucial notion that no human life should be considered more valuable than another, and seeks to minimize the unforeseeable hardships of a fundamentally unfair life. The right defends the equally-noble and crucial notion that progress requires innovation, which requires a dynamic environment with minimal top-down regulation, and seeks to maximize the unforeseeable benefits of a fundamentally unfair life. The paradoxes generated by the mutual validity of both notions are the source of most of political debate. 
